He knew that Mr. Stark and others like him had a
certain following. And there were some very
prominent people like John Lindsay and others
that knew that that was important. And I think put
up with it. He really didn't think it was
necessary. A lot of student life. But he changed
some on that later. Now, when I became aware of the
hierarchy, Wayne Hall was the Vice President of
Academic Affairs. Had Mr. Rutter selected him, or
do you remember? I don't. I don't either. What was
their relationship? It was pretty good. Wayne
was, as you know, dedicated, quiet,
didn't waste a lot of words, and generally made the
right decisions. I don't recall any animosity
there.
What was the guy's name that
came in as the, what did they call him? He was an
engineer by nature, and he ended up back at
University of Houston. Oh, Lordy, what's his
name? He was going to be the research whiz. Yeah.
Oh, boy. Well, his
method of operation was very, very unlike what Mr.
Rutter. I'll think of his name, too, in a minute. He
didn't use good judgment on many of his decisions.
I agree to that. He had the faculty upset. He had
everybody upset. On the surface, he was kind of an
agreeable type of guy, but when it would come to a
decision, he'd come out with some outlandish
things. Well, I remember one day at a faculty
meeting of arts and sciences, he told us that the
way to measure the importance of the research that
anybody did was how much money did it bring in. And
somebody then asked, you mean if we're doing
research that doesn't get any outside funding
that it's worthless? And he said, that's right.
And of course, those of us in history were turned
off.
Did Mr. Rutter have anybody that he turned to for
advice? Tell me what you think of this. Where he
would frankly, candidly? A lot of those were
former students. OK. That he would call, yes. Who
would be the most likely? H.B. Zachary would be
one.
Hal Booty,
John Lindsay.
Doc Daugherty, Evans. Just a minute.
Harold Dunn.
He thought a lot of the Maltz boys. Krueger, Polly
Krueger. Polly Krueger.
I don't know how well he knew Joe Aaron Moore. Joe
Moore was then, I think, less active as a former
student than he became. He would call up board
members too and get their advice on things.
Tom Cherry he leaned on real heavily again.
Not Hannigan.
I was trying to think of He talked a lot with Hervey
and Warris. He probably paid more attention to
former students than any president, but followed
closely by Jack Williams once he got to know them.
Then they were called board of directors, not
regents. Did the directors bother him much with
phone calls, letters? No. It was a remarkable
thing, and you and I have talked before. Those were
the days, and I went to their meetings. I didn't
stay for the closed sessions where they would talk
about personnel matters and things like
coeducation and what have you. But he listened
very closely to Sterling Evans, had the highest
regard for him. And it scared him too because
Sterling was the one that said, boys, we're not
going to get by here much longer without girls. The
other thing is our library is a joke. And that
brings to mind a picture of you and I together on the
top of the library at the topping out ceremony,
which is the central part of the library now. And
Mr. Rudder looked at me with a tear in his eye up
there on that roof and said, Edmund, this is all the
library will ever need.
That's good. But I would put Sterling Evans way,
way up high. Another one on anything to do with the
press, communications, public relations, Sam
Wittenberg. Sam wouldn't show up for the
meetings, but he would call, and he kept in close
touch. And overall, with people like... Boydle
and Simons, as you and I talked about the other day,
and Evans, their attitude was these were smart men
that knew what to get involved in and what, as the
book says, to keep their cotton-picking fingers
out of. They would want to hear why we were moving in
a certain direction and the reasons behind it. And
once they believed it, they were stolidly behind.
But the president made the decision, not the
board. Can you remember any specific example of
where a board member attempted to get involved or
where was turned around in his ideas? I think, and
here again, boy, this is real personal, but the
most troublesome board member I recall was LF
Peterson. He thought that we should beat
everybody in football by a minimum of 40 points. He
would call and ask why certain plays had been
called, and to please get the coach to understand
not to do that again. And I remember he would say
things like, I'd be sitting there when the calls
would come. And every president's rule is, if a
regent calls, put him on. I don't care who's in the
office. And Mr. Peterson, bless his heart, I love
the guy. He was just a big overgrown boy.
Everybody's exuberant. He said, Earl, I'm
sending you five custom-made silk shirts from my
tailor in Japan, and they'll be there Thursday.
Now, that's what I've done for you today. Now, let
me tell you what you're going to do for me. And he
would have some kind of a little, pet project that
he wanted. But somewhere along in there, things
began to change in terms of the relationship
between the president and the chancellor, always
a thorny thing, and the regents. And I have seen it
go from a well oiled machine with people that were
at the top of their field, their professions. And
as you say, this was not the highlight of their
career being on our board. But they used their
expertise and their knowledge and their
smoothness to make it a well-functioning
operation. Not that they agreed on everything
with the president, but you couldn't tell it. But
now, in more recent years, I see people that are in
there for their own magnificence and spotlight
and more of the political thing. Here's what...
I'll go along with, but here's what I want from you,
support for this and that. And it looks like a
committee, like a camel to me, a committee that was
gone crazy. When you first joined the staff, the
board quarters were in that old Victorian house
north of Sbisa. That Mrs. Cashion was the house
mother. She was the house mother. Red Cashion's
mom. Right, right. And they would come there and
where were the meetings held? There was a big room
up on the second floor. The official meetings were
held there? And some of the board members were
housed there and some elsewhere. It was kind of a
rank, RHIP, and the higher ranking ones, most
tenure and what have you, would be there and the
others would be I guess even the Aggieland Inn,
which was right across the street there, way back
there, or at the Student Center. But Ms. Cashin
ran, the visitors would come in and she would sit
there with them if they were going to be on the
program, or they could go upstairs and sit against
the wall and wait for somebody to come out and call
them in. And there was no open meeting then. Not per
se. But the average visitor couldn't walk in? No,
no. That's what I thought. They'd be called in for
their business. Mr. Rudder said, now, these old
boys are doing this for nothing. They're giving us
our time, and we need to be real nice. And so I'm
going to start a new program. Cooper, you're in
charge. We have the meats laboratory, the dairy
laboratory, and I'm going to tell them what we've
got out there, and when they come in, You give them a
little paper. I worked out that system where they
could, here's what you could order. It was mainly
wheels of cheese and any kind of meat product. What
was their favorite? The
wheels of cheese always sold out. And the dairy
people, Mr. Parrot, I remember, was his name.
finally learned that he damn sure better hold back
when he'd see a board meeting coming up instead of
selling it. But they'd buy backstrap off the
cattle. What do you call it? What's the fillet?
Backstrap. And Mr. Peterson would want every
wheel of cheese that was available. And it seemed
like Sterling Evans would buy 15 or 20 back straps.
They used them for entertainment, and said, this
is Aggie, the best we have, and so forth. Now, they
paid for it. Oh, yeah, they paid for it. Yeah, they
paid for it, but they got good prices. But my job was
to gather that up as they left and make sure they...
Walford Kane was a sweet old man. He was on the
board, and I'll never forget a funny, sad thing
that a student driver... slammed the station
wagon door on Mr. King's fingers.
And instead of screaming, he just kept saying, get
the door open. He says, it's closed on my fingers.
At any rate, you'd go all the way from what was fun to
see the personalities as reflected in what they
wanted, what they would buy. And Mr. Clyde
Thompson from Dybal, which he was not one of our
real heavyweights on the board. And I'm sure he was
part of the old timber syndicate over there. And
all these other guys would be ordering full
tenderloins and what have you. And they'd say,
Edwin, you reckon out at the poultry farm they've
got eggs? I said, yes, sir, they've got eggs. He
said, you reckon they've got them big old brown
ones? I said, yes. I said, how many do you want? He
says, a dozen. But to see someone like Evans
contrast with some of the weak sisters that were
political expedience was really funny. And I
always remember everybody called him Doc Boydle.
Never could be seen at a meeting without his hand
computer. Everything that was said, he would
double check it Check the mathematics of it. The
mathematics of it. And I think Mr. Evans through
all the years
probably did the best job of manipulating
President Rutter of any of them to the tune that the
library really was inadequate and that we would
never really reach our potential without girls.
And I think Gracefully, he was able to show Mr.
Rudder the reality, because though he never
looked me in the eye, I am convinced that Earl
Rudder really wanted a very fine West Point type
activity here in College Station. But he finally
realized that wasn't going to fly. And then the
most memorable thing he ever told me was, I don't
remember whether it was just on one trip, but He
stayed at the White House when Mr. Johnson was
there, right at that time, mid-60s, when all the
big decisions were about to be made. And he told me
that he went to Lyndon Johnson and said, I'm not as
good on timing as I should be, but coeducation,
integration, blacks, name change, to the
university, and non-compulsory core, the big
four. And over whiskey, he said to Lyndon Johnson,
primarily the coeducation thing, I think, was he
said, what do you think about it? And the way he said
it to me was, he said, Earl, you can do it your way now
or our way later, and you're going to like your way a
lot better than you're going to like ours. I'm glad
to hear it. Now, when he came back, he'd made up his
mind then that the change had to take place. But he
wanted even then to do it very gradually. And
that's the way it worked right at first. Mr. Heaton
was petrified to put it in the catalog and did not
for three years. But he
came back and the board told him when they were
ready to make these big decisions The board said,
and I hope I'm right on this, and I think I am, said,
Earl, get in with those alumni, and we want them to
support us in advance of this decision. And John
Lindsay was president. And he went to some of the
biggest squabblers about it and said, now look,
now you keep your damn mouth shut, but I had the
president of America tell me that it has to be done
If we want to do it our way, we can do that. Now, we
need you, and you're the one that's squabbling.
Now, the main trouble was in Dallas and Beaumont.
And there was a certain amount of diploma burning,
and not much, not near as much as people laid on,
senior ranks and that. But when he came back with
that story and said, look, what alternatives do we
have? He said, in effect, this is not what I want
necessarily. But it's what's going to happen.
Now, this was after you were working for him. And
then, let me finish that story. I think it was this
same trip where you ask him that, of these
questions. And he let him know what kind of a tight
situation he was in. And just as a side note,
something really big in international policy
came up, and Lyndon was called away from his usual
goodnight drink with whoever his guests were He
said, just stand by. He said, we'll get this damn
thing solved one way or another. We're going to
have some whiskey tonight. And it went on and on and
on, and Mr. Rudder got bored. He could not sit
still. Could not. And he picked up a newspaper
there in the White House, and at a theater not four
blocks away was a theater on the roof, and he'd been
wanting to see that. So he got all of the...
protocol of leaving the White House grounds. He
had all that worked out and his passes and
everything. He went to the picture show and saw
Fiddler on the Roof and at five, about five in the
morning, he said that phone by his bed rang and it
says, Earl Rudder, you son of a bitch, he said. The
President of the United States of America wants to
drink whiskey with you and you go out and see
Fiddler on the Roof. The SS people knew exactly
where he went. Oh, yeah. Oh, sure, sure. And
reported back to him. And that was the funny part.
But I think that was the trip where he did that
several times. But they were really, sure enough,
close. I mean, as close as you can get. And I
remember, I think you were already working for
him. There was going to be a referendum of students
on these questions. But there wasn't going to be a
faculty referendum. And we were really
frustrated. The day before that referendum, by
luck, there was a regular fall meeting of all arts
and sciences faculty, or fall or spring, over in
the chemistry lecture hall. And Mr. Rutter spoke.
And in his speech, he didn't say a thing about those
key questions. And so as there were question and
answer, nobody touched it. And finally, they
said, we've got time for one more question. I
raised my hand. And I was scared so that my voice
quivered as I asked, why didn't you ask the faculty
for their vote on this? And Mr. Rutter said, hell, I
didn't need to ask you all. I know you're all for
those changes. And everybody kind of cheered. And
seven years later, when I was in his office begging
for money for the library, I mentioned that to him,
if he remembered that question. And he said, yes,
and I remember how scared you were. So I give him
excellent marks for that. Are there any other
people that you can think of who deserve mention as
being key
co-education, non-compulsory, co-racial
integration? Well, John Lindsay, I would say...
He was former student president during that.
Right, and I was at the meeting in the...
What did they call the big meeting room right at the
end of the hall on the second floor? The ballroom
was there, but the... Birch room. I guess. Down at
the east end of the second floor? Yes. That was a
birch room. Everybody was on pins and needles
because they knew this was coming up. This is the
former student board? It was their winter board
meeting. Oh, yes. And I was there. Summarize it.
And John Lindsay was as pale as that paper. because
there'd been a lot of hard talk about this, and that
the school was going to hell, and that the alumni
were not going to, when it came down to it, they were
not going to vote to endorse the board's impending
decision before it happened. They wanted
support. And so I was there, and I'm telling you, We
were all on pins and needles. And I guess there had
been a little bit of skullduggery maybe on someone
to make the motion and someone to second the motion
that they support coeducation at Texas A&M
University, support the board's impending
decision to do that. And Lindsey made the, the
preliminary remarks and then said, do I hear a
motion? And someone immediately snapped up. And
there was an immediate second. And there was an
immediate all in favor and all opposed. There was
not a whisper of opposition. And Lindsay slammed
that gavel and was the most got out of there faster
than a speeding bullet. But it went through.
That's what I had heard. Yeah. And that Wirus and
Hervey. had helped yeah uh right and that as i
understand that the former student action may
have helped move another board of directors vote
or two there may have been one or two of those people
that yeah so do you know of any uh director who
officially opposed any uh opposed the uh Those
major decisions? I've never heard of anybody who
officially opposed it. No. If there was, it was
behind closed doors. And he sure said nothing
about it. But I think the key to it all was Rutter's
strategy, and I knew he knew what Lyndon Johnson
was going to say. But when he came back with the
President of America saying these things, what
could you do? I've never heard that. You've
highlighted my day already with that. Tell
me how, as far as you know, how did he start racial
integration? I've heard that he called the
Pentagon and that when they sent some enlisted men
that one summer to begin their finish their degree
that some of them were black okay here's what comes
to mind and i hadn't thought of this a major united
states army was assigned to the rotc the
commandant's office
and he came down for a preliminary trip
mainly to find housing
somewhere close to the campus. And he was denied by
everybody. Because he was black? Because he was
black. The nicest, as I remember, a very nice man.
Today it would be just such a foolish thing, you
wouldn't even, you couldn't believe it happened.
But now here's what I think happened. Earl Rudder
called one of his local honchos, Jack Connolly, by
the way, was a big, they were real close, and
Connolly was mayor. But he called John Cecil
Culpepper Sr. He said, Culpepper, we're going to
find out what you're made out of. You've got all
these little houses over there, you know, over
there by the, they were kind of new then, by the
theater, the mud lot, right in there. He said... I
not only want you to find this major a place to live
in your property, but I want you to get the Real
Estate Association undercover any way you want to
do it. Let's get rid of this crap. He said, we're
going to have black people in here, and you might as
well just grow up to it right now. I need your help.
And he did. At the risk of all sorts of ridicule, he
did it, though. Now, that's my memory of how it
happened. As
I recall, the first black students to enroll was in
a summer, and that some of them were regular army
enlisted men who had been sent here by the
Pentagon, and that Mr. Heaton, somebody I
understood, told Mr. Heaton, you get on the phone
Monday, registration day, and call the
instructors that will have any of them in class, to
tell them that those students are admitted, they
have been admitted, they're OK. And so when they
are in your class tomorrow, Tuesday of summer
school, there is no. Just saying that part of it, I
had no contact with that at all. All right. I think
I'll know the answer to this question. Tell me any
of the major incidents you recall on the campus of
black students attending class.
I don't remember one. No. There weren't any that I
know of. When Rutter asked me in 67 to go out and
develop a program for the non-core students when
we knew we were going to swing that way with girls
and non-military type students, and he asked me to
do that. I've got something I want to give you on
that. How nice. That's from Abby? Yes, it's from
Abby. Beautiful. Joyce and Shelly and Sharon Cash
and all got a hold of my girls and said, take care of
your mother.
When I went over there, there were two civilian
student activities in 1967 to develop a program
for non-core students. And we call them civilian
students, because that's what they call
themselves. Very proudly. Very shortly after I
was on that job and the announcements were made
that I was there to help develop programs for
non-core students, a pretty down-in-the-mouth
couple of black boys came by and said, we don't
believe what you all are saying about us being
welcome here. And I said, well, why don't we get
close together and at least have a chance to
express a view you from the standpoint of the black
students me from the standpoint of what i think the
administration is saying that's what my job is and
i formed the first black student advisory
committee and i am telling you haskell monroe that
our first few meetings were just short of violent
because they truly believed could not believe
though they'd had no stress could not believe that
the university was serious about integration.
Now, these were students enrolled, full-time
students. They were not athletes. They were some
of our first black undergraduate students. But
they anticipated problems. Yes, they did. And if I
ever read people's faces, I can tell you they did
not trust me at first. And gradually, we were able,
when I say here is why this is happening, here's
why, they finally began to trust me some. And
eventually, because of the way things moved
along, I think, in a positive way,
they just quit meeting. I think they were
satisfied that things were going to get better. In
those years working closely with Mr. Rutter,
other than coeducation, Voluntary Corps and name
change and so forth. What do you think were his
other greatest steps of pride, things that
happened that he was most proud of? His
connections with Teague and Moore and Clayton and
others.
One thing he was tremendously proud of was the
amount of state and federal funding that he was
able to get for the institution. And he really
believed in this thing that came about, the study
you were involved with, is we are going for
excellence to do that. We need a first class
faculty, first class student body. That affects
admission standards. We need
facilities. He probably did more for
facilities at that time than all the other
presidents put together. And he had the
connections to do it. Other things that he took
pride in, through his connections, Teague, for
example.